---
title: Rust Programming Language
date: "2021-05-22"
featuredImage: "./rust.png"
---

Rust is a statically typed, compiled, general-purpose programming language that was stable released for the first time in 2015. It&#39;s a relatively new language, but it&#39;s swiftly gaining popularity. However, we might wonder what problems this language answers.

We now have a large number of programming languages, believed to be about 700, and we are only familiar with a tiny percentage of them. Among that small percentage, significant languages are either super-sets or derived from C in some way. C is a fantastic language in and of itself. C has been around for 50 years and is still used in significant domains such as Windows and Linux. C supplied numerous capabilities that we still use today, 50 years ago. However, if we dig deeper into language, we can observe that C has some drawbacks we saw today. C gives programmers a lot of flexibility, allowing them to write code in any way they want, including mistakes. It may not always tell you about potential problems with your code. It had concurrency and memory issues too.

A single line of code can cost you a lot of money, and Microsoft is no exception. In 2021, around 1200 vulnerabilities in Microsoft products were discovered, with each costing an average of \$10,000 USD. They were memory bugs in 70% of the cases. However, Microsoft is not the only one who has suffered losses. Many organisations use Microsoft Windows, therefore a problem with Windows would affect all consumers and businesses.

To address all of the aforementioned issues, Graydon Hoare at Mozilla Labs devised a language that would place some limits on programmers and require them to do things in a safe manner, while also being more efficient and faster than C. Rust was never intended to be a simple or easy language to learn, and it is unquestionably more difficult than other languages, according to the Rust creators. Rust has a built-in borrow checker that prevents multiple variables or threads from referencing the same memory and performs numerous other safety checks at compile time. Rust compiler reports all major runtime errors at compile time.

Rust comes up with somethings unique. It is not an Object Oriented Language, but instead uses structures and traits to solve the same challenges. It does not have a garbage collector, but it does have an affine type system that keeps track of memory, which has proven to be faster and more efficient than a standard garbage collector. Rust can also communicate with Python, NodeJS, C, C++, and Haskell. In other words, we might use the Foreign Function Interface to invoke Rust functions from any of the languages specified above and vice versa.

Many utilities have been rewritten in Rust in recent years, and Rust has become the second language accepted by the Linux community after C, with Rust code being integrated to the Linux kernel in 2021. According to a 2015 Stack Overflow poll, Rust is the most popular programming language. Rust was ranked first as the most popular language among developers from 2015 to 2021, while Python was ranked fifth and NodeJS was ranked tenth. Tilde is a well-known company for creating sophisticated software; in their skylight product, they used Rust to rewrite a Java HTTP endpoint, reducing memory usage from 5 GB to 50 MB. Rust is even employed in embedded systems in some cases.

Overall, Rust is a wonderful language that will undoubtedly grow in popularity in the next years. It is, nevertheless, difficult to learn and master. It is not intended to be an easy-to-use or learn language, but rather to provide optimum performance and safety. In just a few years, this language has branched out into a variety of fields, including web development. Actix Web, a Rust-based web development framework, is the world&#39;s second fastest framework. Rust has so much to offer that it&#39;s impossible to cover everything in one piece, but hopefully this gives you a good overview of the language. One of the languages anticipated to be a language of the next 50 years is this one.
