---
title: Version Control Systems
date: "2021-05-22"
featuredImage: "./version-control.jpg"
---

The majority of programming projects are created by a team of programmers, and each line of code introduced to the project has its own history and purpose. Have you ever pondered how a group of people may collaborate on a project? In general, this may result in several copies of code or duplication of the same project. It&#39;s possible that I&#39;ll be working on a different copy of the project while my project partners work on their own, and that we&#39;ll need one person to merge everything together. This is not a method of team development that is systematic at a same time. That is where the necessity for a version control system arises, and practically all well-known projects are now built using one. This article is primarily for intermediate programmers interested in learning about version control systems.

Version control systems are a category of software tools that helps in recording changes made to files by keeping a track of modifications done to the code. Multiple programmers or developers can collaborate on the same project using version control systems. One of the key goals of a version control system is to ensure that everyone has access to the most recent code. Git (used by GitHub, Gitlab) and Mercurial are common examples of version control systems. Version control systems keep an online repository where the most recent project is stored, and local repositories where different programmers keep copies of the project. If one programmer adds a feature to his local repository or his own copy of the project, he should immediately sync his local repository with the online repository by committing his changes and leaving a good note for other programmers about the changes. And then, other programmers will be notified, and they will be able to sync as well.

In case, if two programmers synced with different changes in same portion of file, this will cause merge conflicts which can be resolved by person who gets notified by version control system.

Git is the most widely used version control system. Linus Torvalds, the creator of Linux, initially released Git in 2005. Git differs from other version control systems such as CVS, Subversion, and Perforce in a few ways. Rather than file-based updates, Git keeps data as a series of snapshots. A new snapshot is not created if no changes are made to a file. Instead, that file is linked to the most recent snapshot. Git is also open source, compact, and fast, with a 15+ year reputation.

As a result, version control systems are critical for almost all types of programmers working on any type of group project. If something goes wrong, they can easily restore a previous snapshot. Because version control systems like git are so widely used, many well-known text editors, such as Visual Studio Code or Sublime Text, have basic internal support for managing local repositories. This isn&#39;t just for teams; many individuals are using them for small projects as well to keep proper records. Personally, I believe it is very useful for taking backups of all codes written up to the present day with the purpose of each code. Finally, I&#39;d like to highlight the importance of knowing how to use a version control system, if you want to work on projects in well-known corporations. If you know how to use a version control system, this is a huge plus and advantage for you.
